http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-1/invited-comments/a-new-communist-horizon/

Peer to Peer Production as the Alternative to Capitalism: A New Communist Horizon
=================================================================================

By Jakob Rigi
-------------

The current crisis of capitalism has provoked protests, revolts and
revolutions in major parts of the planet that include 3 billions of
inhabitants. Even the mainstream Time Magazine made “The Protester” the
person of the year. The caption on Time’s cover reads: From the Arab
Spring To Athens, from Occupy Wall Street to Moscow. China, Chile,
Spain, England, Italy, India, Israel, Iran and France, among many other
places, can be added to Time’s hotbeds of recent social protests.

The protest movements have put alternatives to capitalism on the
historical agenda (Hardt and Negri, 2011). This article argues that a
section of knowledge workers have already created a new mode of
production termed Peer to Peer Production (P2P) which is a viable
alternative to capitalism. Although still in its emerging phase and
dominated by capitalism, P2P clearly displays the main contours of an
egalitarian society. The very fact that sections of P2P activists and
ICT workers are also actively involved in the current protests may work
as a good catalyst in connecting P2P to these movements.

In P2P production, producers collectively produce goods through
voluntary participation in a de-centered, network-based production
system. Volunteers choose the tasks they perform; the amount of time
they spend on collective production; the place and time of their
productive activity. In term of distribution, anyone in the world can
use the products for free according to their own needs, regardless of
their contribution (Benkler, 2006). This mode of production is very
similar to what Marx (1978 a, 1978b) described as advanced communism.
Therefore, it has also been called cyber communism (Kleiner, 2010;
Barbrook, 2007; Moglen, 2003).

P2P and Marx’s advanced phase of communism
------------------------------------------

As the history of the contemporary P2P mode of production has already
been written (Söderberg, 2008; Raymond, 200; Weber, 2004) I pause here
only briefly on two defining moments of this history, namely the
invention of the GPL (General Public License) and Free Software (FS) by
Richard Stallman in 1984 and the invention of the system of online
voluntary collective cooperation by Linus Torvalds in 1991.

Stallman created the Free Software Foundation by releasing a code under
a license he termed the General Public License (GPL). The GPL guaranteed
four freedoms: running the program for any purpose; studying and
customizing the program; redistributing copies either for free or for a
reasonable price; and changing and improving the program. Stallman
included the so called “copyleft” clause in the GPL. According to this
clause any code that would include a component that was derived from a
GPL licensed code must be also released entirely under a GPL license.
Copyleft is a dialectical negation of copyright, because it
simultaneously preserves and abolishes copyright (Stallman, 2002).

The significance of the GPL lies in the fact that it formulated for the
first time in the history of humanity an all-inclusive global property
right. Commons have existed since the inception of humanity in various
forms and among various civilizations (Marx, 1965; Polanyi, 1992;
Ostrom, 1990). But all of them, except commons of knowledge, have always
been territorialized, belonging to particular communities, tribes, or
states. Hence, as a rule, outsiders were excluded. The GPL created a
globally de-territorialized, almost all-inclusive commons. It only
excluded those users who would refuse to release their own products
under the GPL license. The GPL has been modified in the formof Open
Source Software (OSS) in order to accommodate commercial interests. This
new protocol only obliges users to release under a GPL license those
components of their products which are derived from GPL-licensed
products. The owner can keep other components as a private property.
Whether OSS is a corruption of GPL or facilitates the expansion of P2P
is a matter of debate between Stallman and his followers, on the one
side, and the proponents of OSS, on the other (Raymond, 2001, Weber,
2004).

For the purpose of this article I concentrate only on GPL, because it
represents the gist of the new global and universal commons of
knowledge. Most forms of knowledge have been universal commons. Merton
(1979) argued that science requires a communist form of production and
distribution. Although there had been exceptions to this rule (shamans,
magician, priests and artisans, among others, tried to keep their
knowledge secret or transfer it only to select individuals), it was
capitalism and its concomitant regimes of copyrights and patents that
systematically fenced forms of knowledge that could yield profit (Boyle,
1996). As knowledge became a major factor of informational capitalism a
draconian copyright regime grew dramatically (Lessig, 2005 ). The
GPL/GNU pioneered a juridical-productive strategy for producing global
commons of knowledge and protecting them against the invasion by
capitalism. In this sense, Stallman’s initiative was a major milestone
in the struggle of knowledge workers against informational capitalism
(Söderberg, 2008).

It was, however, Linus Torvalds who took this local development to the
global level by making full use of the distributive potential of the
Internet. The production of Linux was truly a revolution in the
organization of cooperation among a large number of producers. Marx
argued that any scientific knowledge was a product of collective work
(Marx, 1981: 199 ), as each scientist built upon the achievements of
previous ones. But this collective aspect of science was not a result of
conscious and simultaneous cooperation among scientists but of
contingent transfer of knowledge along a time and space axis. Torvald’s
invention, by using the Internet, transcended barriers of time and
space. Therefore, it made simultaneous, conscious, voluntary,
coordinated and global cooperation among a large number of producers
possible. The combination of GPL license with the Linux mode of
cooperation represents the gist of the P2P mode of production, which
coincides with the general principles of advanced form of communism,
described by Marx.

​1) There will be no equivalence, between each individual’s contribution
to social production and their share from the total social products.
They will contribute according to their ability and will use products
according to their needs. Money as the quantitative measure of value
will disappear (Marx, 1978b). Money does not play any role in internal
P2P system, though it still constitutes its external context and inserts
pressure on it.

​2) In Marx’s advanced communism the division of labor, and with it the
state and market vanish (Marx, 1978 a, b). In P2P the division of labor
is replaced by the distribution of labor (Weber, 2004) and the logics of
state and market are questioned (see below).

​3) Advanced communism, Marx (1978a) envisaged, would transcend
alienation not only by abolishing the logic of quantitative equivalence
in the realm of exchange between individual and society, and among
individuals, and the division of labor, but also by allowing and
enabling individuals to use socially produced means of production to
materialize their own creative powers. My ethnographic findings show
that creativity and peer recognition are among the strongest motivations
of P2P producers (see also Weber, 2004). Söderberg (2008) shows how P2P
creativity transcend alienation.

At this point we can raise the following questions:

1-Is P2P really a new historical mode of production, or just an
appendage to the capitalist mode of production?

2-What is its relation to the capitalist mode of production?

3-To what extent can P2P be applied to material production?

4-What are the possibilities that it will replace or displace the
capitalist mode of production altogether?

P2P as a new historical mode of production
------------------------------------------

Let us sketch briefly Marx’s concept of mode of production (Marx,
1978c). Production is a process in which humans produce pre-designed
goods. These goods can be material, such as bread; services such as care
and education; or information and knowledge, such as software. The
forces of production consist of humans, their knowledge and skills, the
instruments they use, the material they act upon, and other material
conditions of the production, such as energy, buildings, etc. Relations
of production are “definite” and “indispensable” relations among humans
which correspond to the material stage of productive forces. Property
relations are legal expressions of the relations of production. A mode
of production is the totality of forces of production and relations of
production together.

The P2P production productive forces correspond to what Manuel Castells
(2010/1996:70-72) defines as the Information Technological Paradigm
(ITP). The all-encompassing ITP emphasises informal networking,
flexibility, and is characterised by the fact that technology acts on
information, information acts on technology, as well as by the
integration of various technologies such as micro-electronics,
telecommunications, opto-electronics and computers in a larger system.
It is important to emphasise that knowledge workers themselves are an
important component, or the most important components, of ITP productive
forces.

The centrality of information / knowledge and the network structure
contradict, inherently, capitalist relations of production. The network
logic requires that knowledge produced in each node of a globally
integrated network should flow freely and horizontally in all directions
to all other nodes. Knowledge is a non-rival good, it can be reproduced
at no extra cost. It is also universal in that the same item of
knowledge can, simultaneously, be used by everyone on this planet.

Yet capitalism prevents the free flow of knowledge in all directions in
the net. It is true that the capitalist mode of production, adapting
itself to ITP, has become global, and has increasingly adopted a network
form. However, the sum of all potential links in the net exceeds
dramatically the sum of links of the global networks of capital. Hence,
the potential of the net, as a paradigmatic productive force of our
time, exceeds the capitalist mode of production (Hardt and Negri, 2000).

The same is true of knowledge-information, another paradigmatic
productive force of our era. Knowledge is universal and non-rival.
Capital carves for itself a selected subnet of the total net: the global
network of accumulation of capital. The flow of knowledge-capital is
fenced within this selected subnet. Even within this subnet the flow of
knowledge is not free. First, in the competition between different
multinationals, significant forms of knowledge have become increasingly
secret and are kept jealously only within the reach of a small number of
designers and engineers of particular enterprises. Second, commoditized
knowledge can move from one node to another node only if exchanged for
money. In other words the commodity form itself is a form of fencing.

The ITP also contradicts profoundly the capitalist organization of
production. The net is an open-ended network in which every node can
connect to any other node immediately and horizontally.

This implies that units of production can become de-territorialized
global open-ended associated networks of direct producers where they
cooperate with each other horizontally – though the mediation of a
coordinating authority might be necessary – and produce various goods.
This is nothing but social organization of cognitive P2P. Linux which
has been the inaugurating model for P2P is indeed a practical instance
of such a cooperative network. Wikipedia is another example. This model
can be applied to any form of cognitive production and to a great extent
to material production through automation (see also Bauwens, 2011).

Radical Break with Capitalism
-----------------------------

While practically and empirically the P2P mode of production is still
under the sway of capitalism and to a great extent dependent on it
(buying computers and other materials and services from it and using its
infrastructure), its logic radically contradicts that of capital. I
described briefly above major aspects of P2P that accord to Marx’s
understanding of communism. All these aspects contradict the logic of
capital. Here I will show how the logic of P2P profoundly contradicts
the capitalist division of labour, because division of labour is the key
component of any mode of production. Let me emphasize that in P2P we
have a distribution of labour and not a division of labour (Weber,
2004). The P2P modes of cooperation and the distribution of products
make micro (within separate production units) and macro (among different
units) capitalist divisions of labor superfluous.

P2P and the Micro Capitalist Division of Labor
----------------------------------------------

On the level of the enterprise, capitalist management imposes the
technical division of labor on workers. Capitalists (or their managers)
bring the workers together under the same roof and place them in
particular positions on the line of the division of labor and manage
them. Cooperation among workers is a product of capital (Marx, 1976).
The invention of machines perfected the technical division of labor,
leading to Taylorism in which capital, using scientific methods,
established a full despotism over labor (Braverman, 1974). The scholars
of post-Fordism argue that post-Fordism has transcended Taylorism by
enhancing workers’ skills and involving them in decision making (Amin,
1994). Similar claims have also been made about so-called Japanization
(Kaplinsky, 1988). Such claims are at best controversial (Castells,
2010/1996). Many argue that Taylorism is still the dominant form of the
organization of the labor process (Tomaney, 1994; Huws, 2003).
Regardless of the validity of the Post-Fordist hypothesis, we can safely
say that labour is still compartmentalized in closed spaces and is
managed despotically by representatives of capital. While small select
group of workers may enjoy partial autonomy the total labor processes is
centralized by managers who integrate the work of separate workers into
a total cooperative work process. Andre Gorz (1999: chapter 2), a
proponent of the Post-Fordist hypothesis, says that Post-Fordism has
replaced the Taylorist impersonal and mechanized despotism with new
forms of personal enslavement. Individual producers do not choose their
tasks, or the pace, time and place of their work. In other words the
work process is micro-territorialized both spatially and temporally. In
this sense the contrast with P2P cooperation cannot be stronger. In P2P
cooperation the work processes are globally de-territorialized, in terms
of both time and space.

The increasingly complex growth of hierarchical micro-divisions of labor
which had been a major factor behind the growth of the productivity of
industrial labor has become a barrier to the productivity of cognitive
labor. Brook (1975) showed that in a centralized organization the
increase of the number of engineers who work on a particular software
problem decreases the efficiency by creating unnecessary complexities at
an exponential rate. Raymond (2001) demonstrated that this was not true
of de-centered networked cooperation of P2P. Here, the increase in the
number of workers increases efficiency and improves the product. This
hypothesis can be true of all forms of cognitive production.

The network-based online voluntary cooperation subverts the top-down
logic of the capitalist management which is also the logic of the
capitalist state. However, there is one form of “centralized” control in
P2P. The development of each project is ultimately controlled by the
individual(s) who launch it on the net. At crossroads, they have the
final say, though there is a space for extensive discussions. However,
if others are not happy with decisions taken by leadership, they have
the right to take the entire project and develop it in the direction
they please. Whether this form of “centralization” is an impact of the
external capitalist environment, or inherent to P2P production, needs to
be examined critically (O’Neil, 2009).

P2P and Macro capitalist Division of Labor
------------------------------------------

In the macro capitalist division different units of production are not
connected with each other immediately but through the mediation market.
Workers exchange their labor for wages and the products of their labor
become commodities owned by capitalists and sold in the market. It is
only in this way that the labors of immediate producers of various units
and branches of production are connected to each other, becoming parts
of the total social labor of society. Each unit of production becomes a
component of the total capitalist macro division of labor to the extent
it produces commodities which are sold (Marx 1978). P2P’s products are
principally universal commons.

Although the GPL allows the sale of products, as a matter of common
sense, no one pays for a product which is available for free. The
commercial use of P2P’s products does not make them commodities because
the user does not pay for them and therefore they do not enter the costs
of his own commodity. From this follows that the total labor which is
globally spent today on different forms of P2P is outside the capitalist
social division of labor and circumscribes it. In the current stage the
P2P is also circumscribed by the commodity form as major parts of the
means of production are commodities and the contributors to P2P must
earn money. A fully fledged P2P society is not compatible with money and
commodity. The commodity form inherently circumscribes the freedoms that
are guaranteed in the GPL (this point can also be reached by using
Marx\`s theory of value; however, it requires a lengthy argument that I
have no space to develop here).

To sum up, the ITP productive forces combined with the de-centered
network-based form of cooperation, the absence of wage labor, voluntary
contribution, and the commons form of products constitute the main
features of the P2P mode of production. Although the P2P mode of
production is still an emerging phenomenon, its logic is clearly
different from that of capitalism and has been created as a response to
the requirements of the new productive forces. Therefore, its historical
significance, urgency and novelty can hardly be exaggerated. The
capitalist mode of production is a barrier to the realization of the
potentialities of knowledge in the era of Internet. It limits human
creativity and the development of knowledge workers in general.
Therefore, it is no coincidence that a section of knowledge workers have
rebelled against capitalist relations of production by lunching P2P. As
Söderberg (2008) argues this is a form of class struggle.

The relation of the P2P mode of production to capitalism
--------------------------------------------------------

The new social production consists of islands in the sea of the
capitalist mode of production. The relation between the two, as pointed
to above, is one of mutual dependence and antagonism. The social
production depends on capitalism for acquiring some of the means of
production and wages of its contributors, whilst capitalism on the other
hand uses the commons of social production for free.

Marxists distinguish between the mode of production and the social
formation. The social formation is an integrated
socio-economic-ideological/cultural system. It may consist of more than
one modes of production. However, one mode of production dominates the
others and its imperatives define the overall characteristics of the
social formation. In this sense we can speak of feudal and capitalist
social formations as distinct from feudal and capitalist modes of
production. Although the dominant mode of production dominates other
modes of production, it cannot erase their specific logics. The
continuous tension and dependency between the dominant mode of
production and subordinated ones make social formations dynamic, uneven,
and complex phenomena.

The capitalist social formation has gone through three partially
overlapping phases: the emerging, the dominant and the declining ones.
In the emerging phase (1850-1950) the capitalist mode of production
dominated the feudal, domestic and other pre- capitalist modes of
production worldwide, extracting labor and value from them (Mandel,
1972: chapter 2 ). In the second phase (1950-1980) the capitalist mode
of production eroded the pre-capitalist mode of productions profoundly,
and replaced them with the capitalist mode of production. Capitalism
expanded both intensively, penetrating new domains of productive
activity such as services, and extensively, conquering the whole globe.
The third phase (1980- onwards) is characterized by the emergence of the
ITP paradigm and the social mode of production within the capitalist
social formation. This period has been described in terms such as
“Network Society” (Castells, 2010/1997 ), “Empire” (Hardt and Negri,
2000), etc.

Although the P2P mode of production is still under the sway of the
capitalist mode of production, its standing vis-à-vis capitalism is
different from that of pre-capitalist modes of productions. While in the
two first phases capitalism represented the new productive forces, in
the third phase P2P is the new and emerging mode of production and
capitalism is the declining one. If P2P dominates capitalism we will
have the emerging phase of P2P social formation. I do not want to give
the impression that the victory of P2P over capitalism is either a
smooth evolutionary process or inevitable. It is fully contingent upon
the orientations and consequences of the current social struggle,
particularly the struggle of P2P communities. As I will deal with this
issue in the final section, the following section explores whether the
current social production can be generalized to material production.

Can material production and distribution be organized through the P2P mode of production?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Today the social mode of production (P2P) has been extended beyond
software, covering other spheres of the production of symbols and signs
(see P2P Foundation website). Bauwens (2011) shows that P2P is gaining
grounds in design and manufacturing. Adrian Bowyer (2006) and his
collaborators launched an open source project for the production of a
three-dimensional printer in 2005 which now reproduces itself. Indeed,
the P2P mode of production can be extended to most branches of material
production. Automation will be a pillar of this transformation, though
automation is not a necessary pre-condition for material P2P. In a fully
automated production, the P2P production of cognitive factor (research
and development, design and software) will bring material production
under the sway of P2P. Capitalistic automation leads to loss of jobs and
the degradation of work. Automation will not need to have these impacts
in P2P social formation. Employment has no meaning and the automation
will offer a lot of free time to humanity. This time can be devoted to
the collective production of knowledge, education and care.

As strategic material resources are limited and unevenly scattered
around the globe, a fair global distribution of such resources will
become a major challenge for a global P2P society. The natural limit to
raw material will also place a limit on material wealth and will require
rules of distribution. But the criterion for distribution in the global
community and within each local community cannot be the contribution of
labor by individuals and communities, because cognitive work is globally
collective, has no exchange value and does not produce exchange value.
Only the needs of communities and individuals defined democratically
among and within communities can be the criterion for distribution. I
cannot speculate about rules of a P2P global distribution of raw
material but it seems reasonable to assume that if the knowledge factor
of production will become the free commons of all humanity, then
strategic natural resources must follow suit. The ecological movement
has already conceived the earth and the atmosphere as global commons
(Rabinowitz, 2010 ). The common ownership and use of nature,
particularly land, by the whole of humanity will be the ultimate
challenge for the P2P society and by same token for humanity as a whole.
Hence, the protection of nature will become the major priority of a
global P2P society.

What are the possibilities for establishing a P2P Society: The role of struggle
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Capitalism is in a deep crisis and there is a global anti-capitalist
movement. Moreover, the technological base for establishing a fully
fledged P2P society already exists and a considerable number of savvy
knowledge workers enthusiastically try to expand P2P. Yet, there is no
guarantee that P2P will automatically prevail over capitalism. Tim Wu
(2010) argues that the state and corporate empires will fight tooth and
nail to bring IT technologies under their own control, as they did with
radio technology. But the success of state and capital in preventing P2P
from becoming the dominant mode of production is not guaranteed
beforehand. Things can go either way depending on the consequence of
social struggles. The P2P movement, if supported by all other social
movements of the multitude, may prevail. Social struggle will also
determine what type of P2P society we will have.

What then are the possible scenarios for P2P production to become the
dominant mode of production? Will it grow parallel with capitalism until
it overtakes it? Or, will its path of development be much more
complicated, marked by ebbs and flows, and temporary setbacks? Will a
social revolution that expropriates strategic means of production from
capitalists be a prerequisite for P2P production to become the dominant
mode of production? What will be the role of social struggle and human
consciousness in advancing P2P production? The answer to these questions
needs a collective effort of many. Here, suffice to mention that “the
idea of communism” is becoming appealing again. However it is not
enough, though really necessary, to say that “another communism is
possible” (Harvey, 2010:259) but to imagine the general contours of
communist production. Herein lies the historical and political
significance of P2P production. It represents, though in embryonic form,
a model for communist production and distribution. The success of this
mode of production will definitely depend on the attendant social
struggle. What then are the strengths and weaknesses of the P2P
production social movement? Its strength is that it is a productive
practice.

Its weakness, as Söderberg (2008) argues, is that most of the
participants in the P2P production lack an explicit anti-capitalist
consciousness, let alone a communist consciousness. As already
mentioned, there are some, such as Moglen (2003), Barbrook (2007) and
Kleiner (2010) who define the movement as a communist one. However, the
majority’s involvement in production is motivated by personal reasons,
such as doing something exciting and creative, and improving their own
skills. However participants are aware of, and value the fact, that they
are producing commons. In spite of the lack of an outright communist
vision, my ethnographic observations show that participants have
developed and cherish progressive beliefs, such as valuing cooperation,
preference for creativity and happiness to money and careerism, concerns
for ecology, preference for public interests to egoistic interests,
antipathy towards consumerism, and care for poor people and the third
world. For instance technological activists have helped Iranian,
Tunisian, Egyptian and Syrian activists to organize net-based public
spheres.

P2P communities also develop progressive and humanistic moral attitudes.
The members of communities do not appreciate bragging, self-promotion,
dishonesty and calculative manipulation. On the whole while recognizing
individuals and crediting their contributions the common interest in
maintaining and developing productive P2P communities were strong. No
doubt the formation of a solid collectivist and progressive culture
which grows organically around P2P production and other social movements
will be essential for the formation of a communist society. Despite the
significance of this progressive culture-in-making, it cannot remedy the
lack of a clear programmatic communist vision and sustained theoretical
critique of capitalism among the participants.

The lack of a clear collectivist vision combined with the dominant
capitalist environment makes P2P production vulnerable to invasion by
capitalism. Many projects that had been started as P2P production were
diverted into capitalist enterprises. Under this condition the
propagation of a clear communist vision among the participants of P2P
production will be indispensable for the advancement of the new mode of
production. No doubt there is a self-conscious communist section among
the producers in P2P production. This communist section must carry out
an uncompromising theoretical and critical theoretical struggle within
the P2P production movement. However, this struggle should be conducted
in friendly terms and avoid sectarianism. Communists should not position
themselves against non-communist participants in the P2P movement.
Actually, as Barbrook (2007) argues, all contributors to P2P production
are involved in a communist material practice, regardless of their
attitudes to communism. The task of communists is to describe and
theorize this practice and critique capitalism from the vantage of this
practice. P2P production itself has already developed an outstanding
procedure for the advancement of a critical debate among its
participants. Everyone’s contribution to production is reviewed,
evaluated and credited by others openly and publicly on the net. This
procedure can also be used (and is used to some extent) in political,
theoretical and ideological debates within P2P communities.

In addition to the lack of class consciousness among P2P producers, and
perhaps as a result of this, the absence of sustained
connections/alliances between P2P producers and other progressive social
movements is another weakness of the P2P movement. This is also a
weakness of other social movements. The alliance between a
self-conscious P2P movement and other social movements, with
anti-systemic potentials and goals, will strengthen both sides. P2P
production will receive support in its struggle against the increasingly
draconian copyright regime which has been imposed in the last 30 years.
P2P production, on the other hand, supplies other social movement with
models for a more just, democratic and ecological alternative of
cooperation in production, public sphere, and self-governance; and the
realization of individual freedom and creativity. The very fact the
Occupy Wall Street was initiated by Adbusters and Anonymous, and that
its de-centered/network form of organization, alongside that of
Indignados, is very similar to that of P2P, is indeed very promising.

There is at least a section among P2P producers who clearly relate their
practice to the broader issues of justice, freedom, common goods and
democracy. They also participate in other social movements. The academic
and the activist left, on the other hand, have not yet grasped the
historical novelty and significance of P2P production. They usually
downplay the significance of P2P production as the hobby of some
yuppies, or as an epiphenomenon on the fringes of the capitalist mode of
production. Others downplay its significance by suggesting that tomatoes
or cucumbers cannot be produced through P2P production. They ignore the
fact that technology and life sciences, particularly micro-biology,
including DNA sequencing, which are becoming increasingly important for
agriculture, can be produced through P2P cooperation. Yet another
argument, making a post-colonial gesture, suggests that computers, IT
and 3DPs are the exclusive luxury of the privileged. Although this is
true to some extent, it should not be treated as a static fact.
Subaltern groups fight to appropriate IT technology for their own
purposes. The Zapatistas used the Internet to mobilize global support
for their movement. Recently, Chinese migrant workers, Green movement
activists in Iran, and activists in Egypt, Tunisia and Syria have used
the Internet to circulate the news of their protests. Laptops and mobile
phones, acquiring the functions of computers, are becoming cheaper, and
hence affordable for many, though not for everyone, in the Global South.
The same is true of 3D printers. The left needs to recognize the
struggle over knowledge as the new major terrain of social struggle and
give its due significance to P2P production in this context.

A major protest movement has swept the globe in 2011. What if these
protest movements put the appropriation of major means of production and
their re-organization in a P2P cooperation system on their agenda?

**Jakob Rigi is based at the Central European University, Budapest.\
**

**Works cited**

Amin, A. (1994) (ed.) Post-Fordism, Oxford: Blackwell.

Barbrook, R. (2007) ‘Cybercommunism: How the Americans Are Superseding
Capitalism in Cyberspace’.
http://www.imaginaryfutures.net/2007/18by-richard-barbrook/.

Bauwens, M (2011) ‘Open Design and Manufacturing’ WE\_Magazine.

Benkler, Y. (2006) The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Market and Freedom, New Haven: Yale UP.

Boyle, J. (1996) Shamans, Software and Spleens: Law and the Construction
of Information Society, Cambridge Mass: Harvard UP.

Bowyer, A. (2006) ‘The Self-replicating Rapid Prototyper – Manufacturing
for the Masses’. http://reprap.org/wiki.Philopsphy Page. Dowloaded.
2/26. 2011

Braverman, H. (1974) Labor and Monopoly Capital: Degradation of Work in
the Twentieth Century, New York: Monthly Review Press.

Brook, F. (1975) The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering,
Reading, Mass: Addison-Weley.

Castells, M. (2010/1996) The Rise of the Network Society, Oxford: Wiley
– Blackwell.\
 Gorz, A. (1999) Reclaiming Work, Cambridge: Polity Press.

Hardt, M., and Negri, A. (2011) ‘What to Expect in 2011′. Adbusters.

Hardt, M. and Negri, A. (2000) Empire, Cambridge Mass: Harvard UP.

Harvy, D. (2010) The Enigma of Capital, London: Profile Books.

Huws, U. (2003) The Making of Cybertariat: Virtual Work in the Real
World, New York: Monthly Review Press.

Kaplinsky, R. (1988) ‘Restructuring Capitalist Labour Process’.
Cambridge Journal of Economic,12: 541-70.

Kleiner, D. (2010) Telekommunist Manifesto, Amsterdam: Institute of
Network Cultures.

Lessig, L. (2005) Free Culture: The Nature and Future of Creativity,
Penguin Books.

Mandel, L. (1970) Late Capitalism, London: Verso.

Marx, K. (1965) Pre/Capitalist Economic Formations, New York:
International Publication.

Marx, K. (1978a) ‘Enstranged Labour’ in Tucker, R.C. (ed.) Marx and
Engels Reader, New York: Norton and Company.

Marx, K. (1978b) ‘Critique of Gotha Programme’ in Tucker, R.C. (ed.)
Marx and Engels Reader, New York: Norton and Company.

Marx, K. (1978c) ‘Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political
Economy’ in Tucker, R.C. (ed.) Marx and Engels Reader, New York: Norton
and Company.

Marx, K. (1976) Capital Vol. I, Penguin Books.

Marx, K. (1978) Capital Vol .II, Penguin Books.

Marx, K. (1981) Capital Vol. III, Penguin Books.

Merton, K. (1979) The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical
Investigations, Chicago UP.

Merton, K. (1996) On Social Structure and Science, Chicago: Chicago UP.

Moglen, E. (2003) dtCommunist Manifesto
http://www.emoglen.law.columbia.ed/my\_pubs/dcm.html.

O’Neil, M. (2009) Cyberchiefs: Autonomy and Authority in Online Tribe:
London: Pluto Press.

Ostrom, E. (1990) Govening the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions
for Collective Action,

Raymond, E. (2001) The Cthedral and the Bazaar:Musing on Linux and Open
Source bt anAccidental Revolutionary, Sebastopol: O’Reilly.

Rigi, J. (2011) ‘Peer to Peer Production and Advanced Communism: The
Alternative to Capitalism’ Unpublished ms.

Rabinowitz, D. (2010) ‘Ostrom, the commons, and the anthropology of
“earthlings” and their atmosphere’Focaal: Journal of Global and
Historical Anthropology, 57:104-108.

Soderberg, J (2008) Hacking Capitalism: The Free and Oen Source Software
Movement, New York: Routledge.

Stallman, R. (2002) Free Software, Free Society, Boston: GNU Press.

Tamney, J. (1994) ‘A New Paradigm of Work Organization and Technilogy’
in Amim, A. (ed.) Post-Fordism, Oxford: Blackwell.

Weber, S. (2004) The Success of Open Source, Cambridge Mass: Harvard UP.

Wu, T. (2010) The Master of Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information
Enterprises, New York: Knof.
