http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-1/debate-societal-transformation/ten-patterns-developed-by-the-oekonux-project/

· Ten patterns developed by the Oekonux project

by Stefan Meretz.
=================

Read also the responses by [Maurizio Teli](http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-1/debate-societal-transformation/a-practice-based-perspective/) and [Toni Prug](http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-1/debate-societal-transformation/a-note-on-evaluation-processes-for-social-phenomena-with-ambitious-claims/).
======================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

**Summary\
**\
 The Oekonux project seeks to establish a new basis for analyzing a new
historical phenomenon: the emergence of peer production, starting with
the creation of Free Software. If the initial hypotheses of Free
Software being the germ form of a new mode of production beyond
capitalism is valid, it would be necessary to develop new
epistemological patterns to be able to analyze it adequately. This
requires understanding and criticizing old analytical notions as
historical products of the outlived capitalist way of producing our
livelihood, including those which aim to be in opposition to capitalism.
In this paper I present ten patterns which have emerged from the debates
of the Oekonux Project. They demonstrate what it means to go beyond
traditional affirmative and traditional oppositional or “leftist”
patterns of analysis. Although taken from the debates in the Oekonux
Project, these have never yet been presented in such a condensed way.
Obviously not all patterns will be shared by all the participants of
these debates, because in the end these are my personal conclusions
drawn from over ten years of discussion.

Introduction
------------

In this text I will try to give some introduction to the main ideas
which have been developed since the foundation of the Oekonux project in
1999. There is no fixed set of thoughts and personally I have my own
perspective on Oekonux ideas.

Why is the Oekonux project so relevant for debates around commons-based
peer production? There are two reasons. First, Oekonux developed many of
the ideas many researchers are so familiar with many years before they
reached a wider audience. Oekonux was founded as a project of reflection
around Free Software, but from the beginning the question of
generalizing observations about Free Software to other realms of
immaterial as well as material goods was present. When Yochai Benkler
(2006) coined the term commons-based peer production it only condensed a
year-old debate into a catchy notion, but the insights itself were not
very new and sound very familiar to Oekonux participants. Consequently
the term has been adopted by the Oekonux project.

Second, Oekonux participants have gone much further than others in
questioning the accepted way of thinking. New theses have been developed
which did not only reject traditional discourse patterns in computer
sciences, sociology, and economics, but also in emancipatory political
and theoretical approaches. Stefan Merten, the founder of Oekonux who
comes from an anarchist-marxist background, provocatively rejects
“leftist and other capitalist ideologies” (Merten 2011) for the analysis
of peer production. This sounds quite post-modern, but was meant
differently: All means of emancipation are going to be developed right
in front of our eyes, but we also have to grasp them theoretically.
Traditional leftist patterns are not able to do that, because they
adhere to the given mode of production for whose analysis they are made.

This was an enormous provocation to many people, traditionalists on all
sides. And there have been many cultural and political clashes within
the project. But there also have been a core of people, who continuously
drove the Oekonux approach further. In the following I try to describe
some Oekonux patterns, which of course represent my interpretation of
the Oekonux debate. When I use the past when talking about Oekonux, it
is not because the project does no longer exists. It still exists, and
the Critical Studies in Peer Production journal is not the only spin-off
of the project, there have been many others, so that the focus
decentralizes to diverse projects inspired by Oekonux.

In an interview with Joanne Richardson Stefan Merten (2001) described
Oekonux as a project to evaluate Free Software with respect to its
“potential for a different society beyond labor, money, exchange”. Here,
he gives the keywords Oekonux thinking was built around. I will take and
extend them to illustrate why and how the main ideas contradict
traditional leftist thinking so much, especially when Oekonux started in
1999 (Merten 1999).

Pattern 1: Beyond Exchange
--------------------------

Free Software, or more generally, commons-based peer production is not
about exchange. Giving and taking are not coupled with each other. From
today’s perspective this might not be surprising, but at the beginning
of the Oekonux project it was. Still today traditional Leftist
approaches are based on the assumption that someone is only allowed to
get something, if s/he is willing and able to give something back,
because if everybody is only taking then society would perish. This
position could reference to a painful Socialist (and Christian)
tradition saying that the one who does not want to work, should not eat.
However, Free Software clearly showed that developers do not need to be
forced to do what they love to do (cf. pattern 5).

One important approach which tried to grasp the new developments of Free
Software, although sticking with old thinking, was the “gift economy”
approach. However it is not coincidental that the correct term should be
“gift exchange economy”: The giver can expect to get something back,
because it is a moral duty in societies based on the exchange of gifts.
This kind of personal reciprocal duty does not exist in Free Software.
Even if a developer says that s/he wants to “give something back”, then
this giving is not a precondition to receive something. In general,
commons-based peer production is based on unconditional voluntary
contributions.\
 From a Leftist perspective, uncoupled giving and taking could only be
possible in a mythical land in a distant future called Communism – if at
all. But never today, because before communism is possible, an
unfriendly interphase called Socialism sticking with the exchange dogma
is necessary (cf. pattern 8). Historically, “real existing Socialism”
trying to implement this necessity failed, which will happen with all
Socialist approaches accepting the exchange dogma.

*If one does not want to give up exchange, then capitalism is the only
option.\
*

Pattern 2: Beyond Scarcity
--------------------------

It is a common misconception that material things are scarce while
immaterial things are not. It seems justified to keep material goods as
commodities while immaterial goods are required to be free. However,
this assumption turns a social property into a natural one. No produced
good is scarce by nature. Scarcity is a result of goods being produced
as commodities, thus scarcity is a social aspect of a commodity created
for a market. In the digital era this is obvious for immaterial goods,
as we can clearly see the measures to artificially make the good scarce.
Such measures include laws (based on so-called “intellectual property”)
and technical barriers to prevent free access to the good. It seems to
be less obvious for material goods, because we are used to the
non-accessibility of material goods unless we have paid for them. But
the measures are the same: law and technical barriers, accompanied by
continuous destruction of goods to keep the commodities rare enough to
obtain a suitable price on markets.

Furthermore it seems obvious that we all depend on material goods which
may not be available in sufficient amount. Even immaterial goods depend
on a material infrastructure, at least our brains (in the case of
knowledge), which also need to be fed. This is definitely true, however,
it has nothing to do with a “natural scarcity”. Since all goods we need
are to be produced, the only question is, how they are to be produced in
a societal sense. The commodity form is one option, the commons form
another. Commodities must be produced in a scarce manner to realize
their price on the market. The commons good can be produced according to
the needs of the people using the given productive capacity. There might
be current limitations, but limits always have been subject to human
creativity to overcome them.

Maybe some limitations may never be overcome, but this again is no
reason to make goods artificially scarce. In these rare cases social
agreements can be used to organize responsible use of the limited
resource or good. The commons movement learned that both rival as well
as non-rival goods can be produced as commons, but they require
different social treatment. While non-rival goods are agreed to be
freely accessible to prevent under-use, it makes sense to avoid over-use
for rival goods by finding appropriate rules or measures either to
organize sustainable use or to extend collective production and thus
availability of the rival good.

*Scarcity is a social phenomenon which is unavoidable if goods are
produced as commodities. Often scarcity is confused with limitations
which can be overcome by human efforts and creativity.\
*

Pattern 3: Beyond Commodity
---------------------------

In her studies Elinor Ostrom found, that “neither the state nor the
market” is a successful means for commons management (1990). Based on
traditional economics she analyzed the practices of natural commons and
finally simply proved liberal dogmatics wrong. Markets are not a good
way to allocate resources, and the State is not a good way to
re-distribute wealth and manage the destructive results of markets. Best
results occur if the people organize themselves according to their
needs, experiences and creativity and treat resources and goods not as
commodities, but as common pool resources.

This is exactly what happens in Free Software. Interestingly it took
many years to understand that Free Software is a commons and that it is
basically identical to what Elinor Ostrom and others were talking about
much earlier. One weak aspect of the traditional commons research and
the early phase of Free Software was that a clear notion of a commodity
and a non-commodity did not exist. It was the Oekonux Project which
clearly said: Free Software is not a commodity. This dictum is closely
related to the insight that Free Software is not exchanged (cf. pattern
1).

Critics from the left argued that being a non-commodity is limited to
the realm of immaterial goods like software. From their viewpoint Free
Software is only an “anomaly” (Nuss, Heinrich 2002), while “normal”
goods in capitalism have to be commodities. This assumption, however, is
closely linked to the acceptance of the scarcity dogma (cf. pattern 2).
Moreover, it treats capitalism as a kind of normal or natural mode of
production under conditions of “natural scarcity” (as they think). This
view completely turns real relations upside down. Capitalism could only
establish itself by enclosing the commons, by depriving the people from
their traditional access to resources in order to transform them into
workers. This enclosure of the commons is an ongoing process. Capitalism
can only exist if it continuously separates people from resources by
making them artificially scarce. A commodity – as nice as it may appear
in the shopping malls – is a result of an ongoing violent process of
enclosure and dispossession.\
 The same process occurs in software. Proprietary software is a way of
dispossessing the scientific and development community from their
knowledge, experiences, and creativity. Free Software was first a
defensive act of maintaining common goods common. However, since
software is at the forefront of the development of productive forces it
quickly turned into a creative process of overcoming the limitations and
alienations of proprietary software. In a special field Free Software
established a new mode of production which is going to spread into other
realms (cf. pattern 10).

*Goods which are not made artificially scarce and are not subject to
exchange are not commodities, but commons.*

Pattern 4: Beyond Money
-----------------------

Since money only makes sense for commodities, a non-commodity (cf.
pattern 3) implies that there is no money involved. Thus Free Software
is beyond money. On the other hand, there is obviously a lot of money
around Free Software: developers are paid, companies spend money, new
companies are formed around Free Software. This has confused a lot of
people, even on the left. They stick to an either-or thinking, being
unable to think these observations as a contradictory process of
parallel development in a societal period of transition (cf. pattern
10).

Money is not a neutral tool, money can occur in different social
settings. It can be wage money, invested money (capital), profit, cash
money etc. Different functions have to be analyzed differently. In Free
Software there is no commodity form involved, so money in the narrow
sense of selling a commodity for a price does not exist. However, Eric
Raymond explained how to make money using a non-commodity: by combining
it with a scarce good. In a capitalist society where only a few goods
had broken out of the commodity realm, it is beyond question that all
other goods continue to exist as commodities. They are kept scarce and
they are combined with a priceless good. Using a perspective of
valorization this is nothing new (e.g. spreading gifts to attract
customers). Using a perspective of recognizing a germ form this way a
new mode of production starts to develop within the still existing old
model.\
 But why do companies give money if this money is not an investment in
the traditional sense, but a kind of a donation, e.g. to pay Free
Software developers? Why did IBM put one billion dollars into Free
Software? Because they were forced to do so. Economically speaking they
have to devalue one business area to save the other profit-making areas.
They have to burn money to create a costly environment for their sales
(e.g. server hardware). As the enclosure of the commons is a
precondition for capitalism, the other way around is also true.
Extending the commons in a field currently dominated by commodities
means that this field is replaced by free goods.

However, the “four freedoms” of Free Software – use, study, change,
redistribute – (Free Software Foundation, 1996) do not speak about
“free” in the sense of “gratuitous”. The slogan “free as in freedom, not
in free beer” is legion. This is completely fine and does not contradict
the “beyond money” dictum, because the four freedoms do not say anything
about money. The four freedoms are about free availability, are about
abundance. Thus, the absence of money is an indirect effect. Abundant
and thus non-scarce goods cannot be a commodity (cf. pattern 2) and
cannot make any money. However, making money is not forbidden per se.

There have been a lot of attempts to integrate the non-exchange,
non-commodity, commons-based free circulation of Free Software into the
traditional economic paradigm, which is based on exchange and commodity.
The most prominent one was the “attention economy” saying that the
producers do not exchange goods, but attention (Goldhaber, 1997). They
concluded that attention is the new currency. But this was only a
desperate attempt do cling to old terms which neither worked properly
nor delivered any new insights and thus was not relevant. Various other
similar attempts are skipped here.

*Being beyond money directly results from not being a commodity.\
*

Pattern 5: Beyond Labor
-----------------------

Free Software and commons in general is beyond labor. This can only be
understood if you grasp labor as a productive activity specific to a
certain historical form of society. Selling labor power – i.e. the
ability to work – to some capitalist who uses it to produce more value
than the labor power is worth, is unique in history. This has two
important consequences.

First, it turns productive activity – which has always been used by
people to produce their livelihood – into alienated labor. This
alienation is not imposed by personal domination, but by structural
coercion. In capitalism humans can only survive if they pay for their
livelihood, which compels people to make money. Making money can be
either done by selling their own labor power or by buying and valorizing
the labor power of others. The result is a distorted process where
structural requirements prescribe what a person has to do (cf. pattern
6).

Second, it creates the homo economicus, the isolated individual seeking
for maximization of his/her own utility – if necessary even at the
expense of others. Traditional economists then assert that the homo
economicus is the archetype of a human being, which confuses the
specific historical result with a natural presupposition.

Instead of labor, Free Software is based on Selbstentfaltung. The German
notion of Selbstentfaltung is not easy to translate. On the one hand it
starts from “scratching an itch” (Eric Raymond), “doing what you really
really want” (Fritjof Bergmann), and “having a lot of fun” (the Free
Software developer). On the other hand it integrates other fellow
developers to strive for the best solution possible. This also means
high engagement, passion, and effort, not just picking the low hanging
fruits. It includes a positive reciprocity with others striving for the
same goal in a way, that the Selbstentfaltung of the one is the
precondition of the Selbstentfaltung of the others. Not by chance this
is reminiscent of the Communist Manifesto where the “the free
development of each is the condition for the free development of all”
(Marx, Engels 1848). However, in Free Software it is not a goal of a
future society, but it is an inalienable feature of the beginning new
mode of production on the way to that new free society.

*Instead of selling one’s energy for alienated purposes, usually called
labor, Free Software is based on Selbstentfaltung which is the free
development of all the productive forces of the people.*

Pattern 6: Beyond Classes
-------------------------

Capitalism is a society of separations. Buying vs. selling, producing
vs. consuming, labor vs. capital, concrete vs. abstract labor, use value
vs. exchange value, private production vs. social distribution etc.
Capitalist development is driven by the contradictions between these
separated parts. Among them, labor and capital is only one
contradiction, but it seems to be the most relevant one. A person seems
to be defined by being a labor seller or a labor buyer, a worker or
capitalist. However, in fact labor and capital are not properties of
individuals, but opposite societal functions like all other separations
capitalism generates.

Therefore, it is not true that only one side of the various separations
represents the general or progressive one. On the contrary, both parts
of a separation depend on each other. Labor produces capital, and
capital creates labor. It is an alienated cycle of a permanent
reproduction of the capitalist forms. Thus, both sides of these
separations, e.g. labor and capital, are necessary functions of
capitalism. The so called antagonism of labor and capital is in fact a
purely immanent mode of historical development of capitalism. The
working class does not represent emancipation, by no means.

Free Software and peer production in general is not recreating classes,
it is rather beyond that mode. It represents a germ form (cf. pattern
10) of a new mode of production which generally is not based on
separations, but on integrating different personal needs, behavior and
wishes as a powerful source of development. Exploitation does not exist,
because selling and buying of labor does not exist and money can only
play a role in retro games about antiquated societies called
“capitalism”.

*Selbstentfaltung as a free developing human being is the source of
societal transition towards a free society, not the class adherence.*

Pattern 7: Beyond Exclusion
---------------------------

One of the most basic separations capitalism generates is the separation
of those who are inside and those who are not. This inside/outside
pattern is not a class separation (cf. pattern 6) and it is not only one
big separation. It is a structural mechanism of inclusion and exclusion
along all possible lines of society: job-owner vs. jobless, rich vs.
poor, men vs. women, people of color vs. white people, bosses vs.
subordinated, owners of means of production vs. non-owners, members of
social security vs. non-members etc. It has to be recognized as a basic
structural principle of capitalism: An inclusion of the one side implies
an exclusion of the other side. For the individual this means that any
personal progress is realized at the expense of others who stagnate or
regress.

In general the commons are beyond the mechanism of exclusion. In Free
Software, for example, the more active people join a project the faster
and the better a goal can be achieved. Here, the relationship between
people is not structured by inclusion-exclusion mechanisms, but by an
inclusive reciprocity (Meretz 2012). The maintainer of a project tries
to include as many active people as possible, strives for a creative
atmosphere, and tries to solve conflicts in a way, that as many people
as possible can follow the “rough consensus” and the “running code”.

If a consensus is not possible the best solution is then a fork: a risky
but valid option to test different directions of development. If you
look at existing forks (e.g. between KDE and GNOME), then many of them
are working closely together or maintain an atmosphere of cooperation.
Yes, there are other examples of fights against one another. But these
non-productive forks are mainly due to alienated interests playing an
important role. Oracle tried to implement a command and control regime
after having bought OpenOffice as part of the Sun package. The fork to
LibreOffice by many important developers was an act of self-defense and
self-determination to maintain their environment of Selbstentfaltung.
They don’t want to go back into the old “labor mode” of development (cf.
pattern 5).

*While capitalism is structurally based on exclusion mechanisms,
commons-based peer production generally creates and advances inclusion.*

Pattern 8: Beyond Socialism
---------------------------

Socialism, as defined by Karl Marx in the “Critique of the Gotha
Programme” (Marx, 1875) is a commodity-producing society ruled by the
working class. Historically this was realized by the so called “real
existing Socialism”. There have been many critiques of real socialist
countries (lacking democracy, etc.) from within the left. Nevertheless,
a good part of the left shares the assumption that an interphase between
a free society (which may be called communism) and capitalism is
unavoidable. The general concept is that the working class holding the
power can reconstruct the whole economy according to their interests
which represent the majority of the society. In short: power comes
first, then a new mode of production will follow, in order to build a
really free society. This concept has failed historically.

The reason for this failure is not due to internal tactical differences
and shortcomings. Instead it is due to the unrealistic concept of
qualitative historical transformation. Never in history was the question
of power placed first, it was always the new mode of production which
emerged from the old way of producing which prepared the historical
transition. Capitalism initially developed from craftsmanship in
medieval towns, then integrated manufactures, finally leading to the
system of big industry. The question of power was solved “on the way”.
This does not diminish the role of revolutions, but revolutions only
realize and enhance what was already developing. The revolutions of the
Arab Spring do not create anything new, but try to realize the
potentials of a normal democratic bourgeois society.\
 This analysis of historical developments (discussed in more detail in
pattern 10) has to be applied to the current situation. Historical
transition can not be realized by taking over political power – be it by
parliament or by street actions – but by developing a new mode of
production. The criteria for being “new” can be derived from the
negation of the old mode of production: instead of commodities: commons
production, instead of exchange and mediation by money: free
distribution, instead of labor: Selbstentfaltung, instead of exclusion
mechanisms: potential inclusion of all people. However, care needs to be
taken since not all developments of capitalism are to be abolished.
Rather some continue – though in a transcended form.

*Commons-based peer production transcends capitalism as well as
commodity-based socialism.*

Pattern 9: Beyond Politics
--------------------------

Since commons-based peer production is mainly about constructing a new
mode of production, it is basically a non-political movement. Here,
politics is understood as addressing the state and its institutions to
demand changes in some desired direction. Such politics are based on
interests which in capitalism are generally positioned against each
other. If a society is structured along inclusion-exclusion patterns
(see pattern 7), then it is necessary to organize common but partial
interests in order to realize them at the expense of the common partial
interests of others. In this sense commons are beyond politics, because
they basically do not operate in the realm of interests but of needs.

It is important to distinguish between needs and interests. Needs have
to be organized in the form of interests, if the usual mode of
realization is the exclusion of the interests of others. Commons on the
other hand are based on the variety of needs of their participants,
which act as a source of creativity. The mediation of these different
needs is part of the process of peer production. Thus, it is not
necessary that participants additionally organize their needs as
interests and try to implement them politically. Instead, they achieve
this directly.

One aspect which makes this clear is the question of hierarchies.
Usually hierarchies are part of capitalist commodity production.
Therefore, a common left topic was to reject any hierarchies to avoid
domination. This ignores the fact that hierarchies as such do not
generate domination, but rather the function hierarchies have in a given
context. In a company hierarchies express different interests, for
example the interests of workers and of the management (cf. pattern 5).
However, in a peer production project a hierarchy may express different
levels of expertise or different responsibilities, which are shared by
those who accept someone in a leading position. Being a maintainer does
not mean following different interests at the expense of project
members. Such a project would not prosper. On the contrary, a maintainer
is keen to integrate as many active and competent members as possible.
This does not avoid conflicts, but conflicts are solved on the common
base of the project’s goals.

*Commons-based peer production does not require to articulate people’s
needs in the form of opposing interests and thus is beyond politics.*

Pattern 10: Germ Form
---------------------

Last but not least, the most important pattern is the germ form or
five-step-model (Holzkamp, 1983). It is a model to understand the
concurrent existence of phenomena with different qualities. When
discussing peer production the debate is often dominated by two groups:
those who are in favor of peer production and who try to prove peer
production is anti-capitalist and those who see peer production only as
a modernization of capitalism. The challenge is to think it as both. The
germ form model accomplishes this by viewing the emergence and
development of commons-based peer production as a process of its own
contradictory unfolding in time.

Normally applying the five-step-model is a retrospective procedure where
the result of the analyzed development is well known. By mentally
assuming the result of a transition towards a free society based on
commons-based peer-production the emergence of this result can be
reconstructed using the model. Here is a very rough sketch of the five
steps applied to the case of peer production.

​1. Germ form: A new function appears. In this phase the new function
must not be understood as a rich germ or a seed enclosing all properties
of the final entity which only has to grow. Rather in this phase the
germ form shows only principles of the new, but it is not the new
itself. Thus, commons-based peer production is not the new itself, but
the qualitatively new aspect it shows is the need-oriented mediation
between peers (based on Selbstentfaltung, see pattern 5). During this
phase this is visible only on a local level.

​2. Crisis: Only if the overall old system falls into a crisis can the
germ form leave its niche. The capitalist way of societal production and
mediation via commodities, markets, capital, and state has brought
mankind into a deep crisis. It has entered a phase of successive
degradation and exhaustion of historically accumulated system resources.
The recurring financial crisis makes this obvious to everyone.

​3. Function shift: The new function leaves its germ form status in the
niche and gains relevance for the reproduction of the old system. The
former germ form is now double-faced: On the one hand it can be used for
the sake of the old system, on the other hand its own logic is and
remains incompatible with the logic of the dominant old system. Peer
production is usable for purposes of cost-saving and creating new
environments for commercial activities, but it rests upon non-commodity
development within its own activities (cf. pattern 3). Cooptation and
absorption into normal commodity producing cycles are possible (De
Angelis, 2007), and only if peer production is able to defend its own
commons-based principles and abilities to create networks on this ground
will the next step be reached. Free Software as one example of peer
production quite clearly is at this stage.

​4. Dominance shift: The new function becomes prevalent. The old
function does not disappear immediately, but steps back as the
previously dominant function to marginal domains. Commons-based peer
production has reached a network density on a global level, so that
input-output links are closed to self-contained loops. Separated private
production with subsequent market mediation using money is no longer
required. Need-based societal mediation organizes production and
distribution. The entire system has now qualitatively changed its
character.

​5. Restructuring: The direction of development, the backbone
structures, and the basic functional logics have changed. This process
embraces more and more societal fields which refocus towards the new
need-based mode of societal mediation. The state is stripped down, new
institutions emerge, which no longer have a uniform State character, but
are means of collective Selbstentfaltung (cf. pattern 5). New
contradictions may come up, a new cycle of development may begin.

This is only an epistemological model, not a scheme for immediate
action. The main advantage is the possibility to escape unfruitful
either-or debates. It allows for thinking the emergence of a new mode of
production being useful for the old system while maintaining its
transcending function towards a free society as concurrent phenomena.

*The germ form model adapted in the Oekonux context is a dialectical
conceptualization of historical transition.*

Conclusion
----------

Far from being a consistent theory of historical transition towards a
free society these patterns give a fairly good impression of why they
don’t fit into any of the traditional approaches. There might be some
accordances with one approach or the other, and most of the Oekonux
participants will not agree with all of the patterns, but no single
approach could answer to all challenges at once in a consistent way.

This is not coincidental. On the one hand the formation of a new society
can not be entirely grasped in terms of the already fully developed
society which is going to be made history. On the other hand, there are
overarching aspects which continue to exist in all societies, but which
undergo a reconfiguration. Other aspects dissolve completely. And
finally some aspects are leveraged in a way that they hardly have
anything in common with their origin. These three forms of transition –
preservation, dissolution, leverage – describe the meaning of what
G.W.F. Hegel called sublation (Aufhebung). Ten patterns of societal
transition presented in this paper try to fulfill this requirement.

**Credits**

Special thanks to Stefan Merten and Mathieu O’Neil for editing support.
Tomislav Knaffl gave valuable hints.

**Works cited**

Benkler, Y. (2006), The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Markets and Freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press, URL:
cyber.law.harvard.edu/wealth\_of\_networks/ (2011-10-10)

De Angelis, M. (2007), The Beginning of History. Value Struggles and
Global Capital, London: Pluto Press.

Free Software Foundation (1996), The Free Software Definition, URL:
www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html (2011-10-10)

Goldhaber, M.H. (1997), The Attention Economy and the Net, in: First
Monday, Vol. 2, No. 4, URL:
firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/519/440
(2011-10-10)\
 Holzkamp, K. (1983), Grundlegung der Psychologie, Frankfurt/Main, New
York: Campus.

Marx, K., Engels, F. (1848), Manifesto of the Communist Party, URL:
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/ (2011-10-10)

Marx, K. (1875), Critique of the Gotha Programme, URL:
marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ (2011-10-10)

Meretz, S. (2012), The Structural Communality of the Commons, In:
Bollier, D. et al. (2012), Self-Sustaining Abundance, in print.

Merten, S. (1999), Willkommen bei ‘oekonux’, URL:
www.oekonux.de/liste/archive/msg00000.html (2011-10-10)

Merten, S. (2011), Leftist and other capitalist ideologies and peer
production, URL: www.oekonux.org/list-en/archive/msg06135.html
(2011-10-10)

Merten, S., Richardson, J. (2001), Free Software & GPL Society. Stefan
Merten of Oekonux interviewed by Joanne Richardson, URL:
subsol.c3.hu/subsol\_2/contributors0/mertentext.html (2011-10-10)

Nuss, S., Heinrich, M. (2002), Freie Software und Kapitalismus, in:
Streifzüge 1/2002, URL:
www.streifzuege.org/2002/freie-software-und-kapitalismus (2011-10-10)

Ostrom, E. (1990), Governing the Commons. The Evolution of Institutions
for Collective Action, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

-   [About](http://peerproduction.net/about/)
-   [Issues](http://peerproduction.net/issues/)
-   [Peer Review](http://peerproduction.net/peer-review/)
-   [News](http://peerproduction.net/news/)
-   [Contact](http://peerproduction.net/contact/)

Journal of Peer Production - ISSN: 2213-5316 \
 All the contents of this journal are in the **public domain**.
