http://peerproduction.net/issues/issue-1/invited-comments/beyond-digital-plenty/

Beyond digital plenty: Building blocks for physical peer production
===================================================================

by Christian Siefkes
--------------------

**Summary**

Commons-based peer production has produced astonishing amounts of freely
usable and shareable information. While that is amazing in itself, many
people think that it is all, arguing that peer production flourishes in
the digital realms of the Internet—and only there. This would mean that
peer production could never be more than a niche phenomenon, since
nobody can survive on information alone. This article challenges the
conventional viewpoint, arguing that the potential of peer production
extends far beyond the digital sphere into the sphere of physical
production and that corresponding developments are already under way.\
 The article contrasts the plenty of the digital world with the apparent
scarcity of the physical world. It explains the difference between
scarcity and limitations and why is it necessary to distinguish between
different meanings of the word “plenty” when thinking about the
possibility of plenty in a limited world. It shows that firm- and
market-based capitalist production is unable to produce plenty for
everyone due to its inherent traits, but that commons-based peer
production is very different in this regard. It sketches building blocks
for the generalization of peer production into the physical world,
referring to examples that exist today. Finally, questions of fairness
in a peer production–based society are discussed.

Digital Plenty Versus Natural Scarcity?
---------------------------------------

### The Internet as a Place of Plenty

The Internet has become a place of plenty—plenty in different meanings
of the word. The first meaning of plenty is “lavishness” or
“wastefulness.” I might spent all day clicking through photo sharing
sites, looking endlessly at pictures of any people or topics (say, Mount
Everest), even though at some point they’ll start go get fairly
repetitious and I have seen everything of interest—I can continue
nevertheless.

I can use BitTorrent to download tons of movies—that’s usually illegal,
but it works—until I’ve filled my hard disk with movies, even though I
might never find the time for watching them. I can install any number of
free software programs, endlessly trying new ones, even if I don’t
really use any of them. It’s easy to waste time on the Net.

But plenty also has another meaning: “getting what I need, when I need
it.” The Internet offers plenty in this sense, too. Just try to remember
(if you’re old enough to do so) how cumbersome it was to research
something before the Internet. You had to visit a library to find books
on the topic; if none existed, you had to try locating articles in
journals or finding out whether there were experts somewhere that you
could reach and that responded to your queries. Today, doing initial
research has simplified enormously: just enter some search terms in
Google or read the Wikipedia article on the topic, then follow the most
interesting links for further reference. It has become so easy to find
information on practically any topic that it is hard to remember how it
was before.

Solving problems has likewise become much simpler. Since you are hardly
the first person with any specific problem, you can search the Internet.
Usually you’ll find others who had the same problem and wrote about it.
You can check the solutions they came up with; if that’s insufficient,
it’s often easy to get involved and ask for help. In the past, it was
very hard to find and cooperate with people with similar problems or
interests, unless (maybe) if they lived in the same city or area as you.
Not anymore.

When looking for a specified piece of music or a particular video, I’m
quite likely to find it on YouTube or elsewhere online. And I can
download and watch the movies I’m interested in—usually not legally, but
still. I can find free software programs to do specific tasks or to
solve specified problems—whether for Web surfing, watching videos,
editing photos, videos, or music, playing games, developing
programs—almost anything is there. Thus, the Internet is also very good
at providing plenty in the sense of “what I need, when I need it.”

It might seem as if the plenty originates in the digital nature of the
Internet itself. But that would be a wrong impression. Digital
technology is only the foundation; the producers of the plenty are the
people who use the Internet and make it all happen. I will return to
that issue, but prior to doing so I will look a the limitations of the
physical world which make it appear so different from the digital plenty
of the Net.

### The Ecological Footprint: Is Scarcity “Natural”?

One issue that might seem to make the concept of plenty—plenty for
everyone—in the natural world hopeless has become known as “ecological
footprint.” The ecological footprint is the amount of land necessary to
generate all the resources consumed by a human population and to absorb
and render harmless the corresponding waste. It is measured in “global
hectares,” meaning hectares (one percent of a square kilometer) of land
of average fertility.

Today, the ecological footprint of humanity is about eighteen billion
global hectares, but the Earth’s total biocapacity is only about twelve
billion global hectares. The disparity is obvious: our current lifestyle
would require one and a half Earths to be sustainable. We consume
resources much faster than the Earth can replenish them. Since such
overuse is impossible in the long run, we live at the cost of future
generations.

But not everybody does. In many countries, the average footprint per
person is very low. In Bangladesh and Afghanistan, it is just 0.6 global
hectares per person; in India and Yemen, 0.9 hectares; in Iraq and the
Philippines, 1.3 hectares. In these and many other countries, resource
usage is below the sustainable average that can be calculated by
dividing the twelve billion hectares of available biocapacity among the
seven billion people alive: 1.7 hectares per person.

The actual global average is about 2.7 hectares per person, more than
50% higher than sustainable. My own country, Germany, uses almost twice
as much: 5.1 hectares per person. Most other European countries have
similar values. The average footprints of the USA and some Arab
countries are highest: 8.0 hectares per person, or more (see Wikipedia
2011). We who live in highly industrialized countries, thus not only
live at the cost of future generations, but also at the cost of people
in other parts of the word. Our consumption patterns are only possible
because people elsewhere consume much less.

Scarcity, Limitations and How (Not) to Produce Plenty
-----------------------------------------------------

It is clear that to remain possible and sustainable in the long run, all
production is bound to the limits of the available biocapacity. This
constraint holds regardless of the social form of production. The limit
of currently 1.7 global hectares per person can be surpassed for some
and for limited periods of time, but not for all and forever. Such
limitations must be respected, but limitations, as Stefan Meretz points
out in his contribution to this volume (Pattern 2) are not the same as
scarcity. Scarcity means that there is *not enough* of something, hence
it depends, first, on how much of a good is needed (and by whom) and,
secondly, on how much of a good is produced (and by whom). Scarcity is
thus a social phenomenon, never a natural one.

Above I distinguished two concepts of plenty—unlimited wastefulness
versus “getting what I need, when I need it.” It’s easy to see that
unlimited wastefulness will quickly collide with the limits of our
planet. It won’t be possible for everybody to have five cars in their
garage, or use everything just for a little while and then throw it
away.

But plenty in the second sense is a different matter. Things that are
quickly discarded won’t satisfy more needs than things that are used for
a long time; and you don’t need five cars to reach your destination
quickly and conveniently—depending on the situation, one car, an
(electric) bicycle or good public transportation will do as well or
better. This concept of plenty isn’t focused on the accumulation of
things, but on the satisfaction of needs.

Is it possible to produce “what you need, when you need it” for
everybody, on this limited planet? That question cannot be answered
without considering the social form of production.

Capitalism is the mode of production that dominates today. For this
mode, the answer must be no. Capitalism is good at producing plenty for
some, but it does so at the expense of others. Most people in the Global
South are excluded, and many poor people in the “rich” countries are
largely excluded as well. This is not just an empirical fact, there are
also theoretical reasons why it must be so.

First, the goal of every capitalist entity, every investor and every
company, is to “make money,” that is, to turn money into more money.
Making money is only possible if somebody produces something (though
that relation may be quite indirect and far away), and production always
requires resources. And if the goal of “making money” is reached, as a
result there is more money that must be invested again in order to make
even more—and so on. The capitalist process thus has a built-in,
infinite urge to grow, to produce more and to use more resources.
Over-exploitation of the biocapacity is the logical result. With
capitalism, the only alternative to growth is crisis: investments fail,
leading to a loss of capital with companies going bankrupt. People lose
their job and thus the possibility to benefit from the limited plenty
which capitalism produces for those who can afford it. Neither
alternative is good: crisis causes people to suffer, but permanent
growth necessarily comes at the expense of nature.

Moreover, plenty for everybody is impossible because companies produce
goods in order to sell them—that’s how they make money. But things can
only be sold if they are scarce, if they don’t exist in sufficient
quantity. Otherwise, if supply is higher than demand, prices tend to
fall towards zero. This makes the market in question unattractive for
producers since it becomes hard or impossible to “make money.” Some
producers will withdraw or go bankrupt, finally leading to a situation
where supply falls below demand and the situation of scarcity required
for successful investments is restored. If capitalist corporations are
not the only source of goods, but people can get them for free from
nature or from other people, commercial exploitation will face ongoing
problems. This is the situation the music industry finds itself in,
since the Internet facilitated the noncommercial sharing of music. In
such a situation, the affected companies will desperately try to smash
the noncapitalist alternative, just as we see today.

Finally, there is a conflict between plenty for everyone and the core
principle of capitalist markets: competition. Competition means that
whenever someone wins, someone else loses. It doesn’t matter whether
companies compete for market share or people for jobs: some will be
successful, but the rest will fail, going bankrupt or becoming
unemployed. There may be plenty for the winners, but the losers won’t
get more than some modest handouts from the government, if at all.

Commons-based Peer Production: A Different Mode of Production to the Rescue?
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thus, plenty for everybody is only a possibility with another mode of
production. But how might such a mode of production work? Indeed, what
becomes of the concept of “work”? In capitalism, work is usually a means
to an end: companies employ workers in order to produce salable
products; people work to earn money that they need in order to “make a
living,” i.e., to survive. When politicians talk about “increasing the
incentives to work,” they mean increased sanctions about people unable
or unwilling to find work. Work seems to be something that you only do
if you have to, if it’s forced upon you by economic necessity or social
pressure.

But does it have to be like that? Let’s return to the way in which
plenty is produced on the Internet. Not all of the digital plenty we can
find there, but a large part of it is a result of the process we call
*commons-based peer production* — the very topic of this journal.

In many cases, peer production differs considerably from the
conventional model of work as a means to make money. Innumerable people
help writing and editing the free encyclopedia Wikipedia, without
expecting financial compensation. Others make music, take pictures, or
publish texts, freely sharing their works online. People create and
share free software such as the GNU/Linux operating system and the
Firefox web browser. Others set up wireless community networks and still
others devise open hardware and open designs, freely sharing designs and
blueprints of furniture, clothes, machines and other items.

Commons-based peer production is no longer a marginal phenomenon, but an
essential part of the modern world. The Internet largely runs on free
software; Wikipedia has become a primary source of information for many
people.

Peer production is *benefit-driven*: in contrast to capitalist
production, the goal is not to “make money” (turn money into more).
Instead, the specific needs, desires, and goals of the participants
determine what happens. This changes the nature of the activity: many of
the participants don’t get involved in order to make money (though that
happens as well), but because they like doing the things they can do
there or out of an interest in the goods produced (e.g. the free
software developed in a project). Other frequently pursued goals are to
learn something or “to give something back to the community” (cf.
Lakhani and Wolf 2005).

Such peer production is no longer “work” in the traditional sense. The
Wikipedia works only because its founders managed to replace the tedious
and monotonous work of encyclopedia writing by a process that’s easy to
start with and that people enjoy doing.

Rather than creating commodities that can be sold with a profit, peer
producers jointly create, maintain and foster *commons*: resources and
goods that are developed and maintained by a community and shared
according to community-defined rules. It’s important to note that the
community makes its own rules—they aren’t predefined or imposed from
above. Commons are usually shared among the community members or
beyond—free software and free content are commons that *everyone* can
use and improve, without exclusions. Free licenses (such as the GNU GPL
and the Creative Commons licenses) codify these community rules in a way
that makes them legally binding.

Since cooperation in peer projects is voluntary, no one is forced to
handle specific tasks. The way of distributing tasks in such projects is
often called *stigmergic* (cf. Heylighen 2007). Participants leave hints
about tasks they have started and things they would like to see,
encouraging others to take over. Bug reports in software projects and
“red links” (pointing to missing articles) in the Wikipedia are examples
of such hints. These hints provide orientation to newcomers and to
participants that have completed some tasks and are looking for
something new. The more participants care for a task, the more visible
the hints pointing to it will become, increasing the chance that
somebody starts working on it.\
 Can peer production achieve that which capitalism cannot: produce
plenty (in the sense of “what you need, when you need it”) for everyone?
Not just in some specific areas (e.g. software) and not just for some
people, but in all areas, for everybody?

To make this possible, peer production needs to grow beyond the
immaterial into the material world, producing not just information, but
also physical goods and services. But is that even possible? “An
abundance of information about how we might make things is not the same
as an abundance of things—it is an abundance of recipes not an abundance
of food,” the economist and community activist Brian Davey (2010)
argues, complaining that commons-based peer production can produce only
the information (recipes), but not the physical things (food). The
underlying notion, shared by both proponents and critics of peer
production, is that it excels in the sphere of information, which is so
easy to copy and change, but fails in the material world, which isn’t.

But this argument misses the fact that it’s not an inherent property of
information that makes it so easy to copy, but rather a question of
*infrastructure*. 30 years ago, only corporations with extremely
expensive specialized machinery were able to reproduce music, as Glyn
Moody (2010) points out. Only the spread of broadband Internet
connections and sufficiently large hard discs made it commonplace.

Similar developments regarding the production of physical things are not
only possible—in some areas, they are already under way. The
reproduction of physical things is possible if three conditions are met:
you need access to the *complete design*, to the required *resources*
and to the necessary *means of production*. In the following section, I
will try to briefly outline how generalized peer production may become
able to fulfill these conditions.

Building Blocks for Generalized Peer Production
-----------------------------------------------

If we consider at contemporary forms of peer production, we find that
the used resources and means of production tend to be *commons* or
*distributed widely*. For digital peer production, knowledge and
information are the most important resources. They are generally treated
as commons that everybody can use, share and improve. This philosophy is
nicely expressed by the Wikimedia Foundation (2011), the organization
running the Wikipedia and related wikis:

“Imagine a world in which every single human being can freely share in
the sum of all knowledge. That’s our commitment.”

*Open design* (also called *open hardware*) is the kind of knowledge
most important for producing physical things. Open hardware projects
design physical things, freely sharing their designs and blueprints with
everyone. This area of peer production is quite young, but recent years
have seen a multitude of project emerging. The Open Hardware Directory
of the P2P Foundation (2011) lists more than 300 projects, and there are
many areas of open design (e.g. clothing and textiles) which it doesn’t
even track. Producing and sharing free knowledge about how to fabricate,
maintain, repair and recycle things is the first building block of
physical peer production.

We have seen that peer production tends to treat essential resources as
commons. Extending this logic to physical production implies that
natural resources must become commons too, since they are certainly
essential. More than a hundred years ago, Karl Marx (1894, ch. 46)
arrived at the same conclusion:

“From the standpoint of a higher economic form of society, private
ownership of the globe by single individuals will appear quite as absurd
as private ownership of one man by another. Even a whole society, a
nation, or even all simultaneously existing societies taken together,
are not the owners of the globe. They are only its possessors, its
usufructuaries, and, like *boni patres familias*, they must hand it down
to succeeding generations in an improved condition.”

Treating natural resources as commons means that nobody can claim
exclusive rights over them and that they must be preserved in their
substance—they can be used, but not used up. Since nobody has privileged
access, the sum of resources is to be shared among all. The ecological
footprint provides some guidelines about how much everybody can use
while still leaving enough for others. In this way, it’s possible to
deal with the limitedness of Earth’s resources in a manner that doesn’t
exclude or disadvantage anybody.

Preserving and sharing natural resources as commons is the second
building block of physical peer production. Switching from the
capitalist logic of treating almost everything (including most natural
resources) as somebody’s property to treating resources as commons will
be a huge challenge, since it radically disrupts the existing control
and exclusion rights of the current “owners” of these resources. We
already see a lot of such struggles going on the digital realm today
(should information be considered a private property or a commons?) and
we can expect much more and heavier struggles about commons versus
property for the future.

No production is possible without means of production, such as the
machines used to produce. In the field of digital peer production, the
means of production are usually owned by lots of different people.
People writing free software or Wikipedia articles do so on their own
computers. That’s very different from capitalist production, where the
means of production are usually owned by a company that employs people
and uses both (people and machines) to make a profit.

If somebody else owns (and thus controls) the means of production you
have to use, you are dependent on their decisions. With distributed
ownership, such unilateral dependency relations are avoided. Nobody can
stop others from becoming active, or dictate them conditions they have
to fulfill.

Similar developments start to occur in the area of physical peer
production. Decentralized, self-organized productive infrastructures are
emerging, created and run by people who use them to satisfy their
productive and consumptive needs. The goal is benefit, not profit. And
ownership of these infrastructures is spread so widely that nobody can
effectively exclude others.

Mesh networks are an example of this trend. The classical model of
network access is hierarchical: each provider connects thousands or
hundreds of thousands of people (customers) to the Internet. The
provider is a single point of failure and control. It can disconnect
customers who cannot pay or violate arbitrary “terms of service”; it can
monitor its customers’ behavior and censor what they can see and do. If
somebody orders or forces the provider to go offline, all its customers
are offline too (as happened in Egypt during the uprising in early 2011,
when the government shut down almost all Internet connections for
several days).

Mesh networks, on the other hand, are distributed networks where all
nodes (connected computers) are equal. Typically, every node uses
wireless connections to directly communicate with the nodes in its
neighborhood; if the target computer is too far away, nodes that are
physically between source and target node act as relays, transmitting
the message to its destination. There are no central servers that could
be turned off to disable service, and if individual nodes disappear from
the network, the nodes near them automatically determine new routes
around them. Thus, there are no central authorities that could monitor
or censor the network.

The inhabitants of the town of Scarborough in South Africa have set up a
mesh network that gives them Internet and telephone access. The required
hardware is distributed among many people—everyone can contribute by
buying a wifi router, antenna, or other equipment and making it part of
the mesh. The network runs entirely on free software and parts of the
equipment are developed as open hardware, allowing everyone to share and
improve the designs (cf. Rowe 2010).

Similar solutions should be possible for energy generation and access to
water. Projects organizing water supply as a commons already exist in
South America (cf. De Angelis 2010).

Hackerspaces (see hackerspaces.org) are another example—self-organized
meeting points of people that use them to develop free software, create
free content, to learn and share their knowledge, or just to relax and
have fun. Most hackerspaces are funded through contributions of their
members, but usually everybody is welcome, even if you don’t pay.

Fab Labs are organized along similar lines, but their goal is physical
production. By now, there are more than 60 Fab Labs in all continents
(cf. MIT 2011). They host various production machinery that can be used
by people in their neighborhood for localized production. Usually there
are computer-controlled (CNC) milling machines and laser cutters for
“subtractive manufacturing,” forming a piece of material (e.g. wood or
metal) by removing the unnecessary parts through cutting or milling.
Many Labs also have “fabbers” (3D printers) that can additively
manufacture items by “printing” multiple layers of e.g. plastic, one
above the other.

So far, much of the required equipment is still proprietary and quite
expensive to get, hence most Labs need the sponsorship of a university
or other organization. But this is gradually changing, since a multitude
of peer projects developing production tools as open hardware have
emerged during the last years. There are free and open CNC routers like
the Kikori (sindrianarts.com), laser cutters like the Lasersaur
(labs.nortd.com/lasersaur/), fabbers like the RepRap (reprap.org) and
the Ultimaker (ultimaker.com). While most of these tools are not yet
competitive with commercially manufactured, proprietary equipment, the
gap is getting closer.

Once the used machines are itself the result of peer production, they
can be freely reproduced by anyone with the right equipment. And if the
open production hubs—more advanced future “Fab Labs”—themselves host the
equipment necessary to reproduce their tools, things become exciting,
since it means that the open network of production facilities can grow
without requiring much input from the market. In this way, a partial
decoupling from capitalist production becomes feasible. People
cooperating as peers would no longer be required to buy almost
everything (which means that they also have to sell something, e.g.
their labor power, in order to get the necessary money). Instead, they
could jointly produce what they need. Thus, the self-organized
fabrication and utilization of the means of production becomes the third
building block of physical peer production.

None of this would be possible without the people who contribute their
time and effort to share their knowledge, to design and make useful
things, to organize and run hackerspaces, Fab Labs and other hubs for
peer production. People self-select to contribute in some ways that fit
their preferences and desires. Such voluntary contributions of peers are
the basis of any kind of peer production—whether it is software,
cultural works, designs, or physical things that are thus produced. They
are the fourth and most important building block of peer production.

Fairness Questions
------------------

But could a society based on self-organized peer production really work?
Or wouldn’t it at least be incomplete, staying dependent in some aspects
on more traditional forms of social organization, such as governments,
police forces, or markets? Especially in regard to matters of fairness
(or justice), many people are quick to point out the presumed necessity
of centralized regulatory bodies.

One critical point is access to resources. The logic of peer production
postulates that resources be treated as commons that can be used as long
as they are substantially preserved for the future and everybody gets
their fair share. But what if some try to violate this principle, using
much more resources than a sustainable ecological footprint allows, thus
living at the cost of others (either now or in the future) who would
have to do with less?

It may seem that some kind of governmental institution is necessary to
prevent and sanction such behavior. But the practice of peer projects
shows a different way of dealing with misconduct (as perceived by the
community): participants react by “flaming and shunning” (cf. Lehmann
2004). People will publicly criticize and admonish the wrongdoer—often
friendly at first, but increasingly turning to aggressive, scolding
“flames” if the critique is ignored. If these warnings are ineffective,
people turn to “shunning” the wrongdoer, starting to completely ignore
them and refusing to cooperate with them any longer. In extreme cases,
the shunned person is officially banned from the project.

But everybody needs others, regardless of the form of society one lives
in, and in a society based on peer production this mutual dependency
would be even stronger. Without others, it would be difficult to survive
and a good living would be out of the question. Hence, if there is a
broad social consensus of not accepting certain kinds of behavior, still
engaging in such behavior becomes almost impossible (and almost
certainly not worth the social price one has to pay for it).

The distribution of tasks is another potentially problematic area. For
peer production, the usual mode of task distribution is stigmergic
self-selection. Everybody chooses for themselves how to get involved and
what to do, inspired by other people’s hints about what is needed. But
how can peer producers deal with tasks for which this doesn’t work—tasks
which nobody, or not enough people, are willing to do?

The first question to ask is whether these tasks are indeed necessary.
If nobody cares about a task sufficiently to be willing do to it, maybe
one can simply do without? If that’s not the case, another possible
solution may be automation. Since the start of the “industrial
revolution,” automation has had tremendous effects; most productive
processes have became automatized partially or fully. Most suitable for
automation are tasks that are monotonous and repetitive—and therefore
often quite unpopular. Activities that require intelligence, creativity,
and intuition are harder or impossible to automatize, but they are
usually less of a problem anyway, since the nature of these tasks tends
to make them sufficiently interesting and appealing.

However, in capitalism, the height of wages limits the potential of
automation—the worse paid a job is, the more difficult it is to automate
without incurring extra costs (which wouldn’t make sense from the
capitalist viewpoint). But the salaries paid for many unpleasant
occupations (e.g. cleaning) tend to be specifically low, making them
unattractive to automatize in capitalism. In a peer production–based
society, the situation would be different. If almost everybody wants to
have a task done, but nobody wants to actually do it, the incentive to
fully or partially automatize it becomes very high. And in such cases it
should be much easier to find volunteers for designing and creating the
necessary workflows and equipment (a more interesting and challenging
activity) that allow automation then for the tasks itself.

A further option for dealing with unpopular tasks is to reorganize them
in a way that makes them more pleasant—more entertaining, more
interesting, easier. In capitalism, the working conditions of low-paid
and unattractive jobs are usually very bad (e.g. office cleaners have to
start extremely early in the morning). However, such conditions are not
an inherent part of the tasks. With peer production, the (potential)
volunteers decide how to organize their activities and what
circumstances to accept. They don’t have to accept circumstances
dictated by others and can do away with such unattractive conditions.

If neither approach is possible, the unpleasant tasks could be shared in
a fair manner. If everybody (or everybody who cares) does a small part
of such tasks now and then, they can be dealt with without causing much
trouble to anybody.

Peer production is not a panacea for solving all social problems, but it
opens many opportunities to join forces with others and to jointly
address the issues one considers important. Under capitalism, people are
constantly forced to work against each other, causing lots of extra work
and unnecessary suffering. Peer production can do much better because it
is benefit-driven: people produce something, together, because it fits
their productive or consumptive needs. In capitalism, one person’s or
company’s economical success necessarily comes at the cost of others,
but the same is not true if people join forces to satisfy their needs.
One person’s needs doesn’t have to come at the cost of others, nor of
nature. On the contrary, peer production works so well since people help
each other to reach their goals and fulfill their needs, which is an
advantage for everybody involved.

**Works cited**

Davey, Brian (2010): The Abundance of Food vs the Abundance of Recipes.
URL:
http://p2pfoundation.net/Abundance\_of\_Food\_vs\_the\_Abundance\_of\_Recipes
(accessed 29 Nov 2011).

De Angelis, Massimo (2010): Water Umaraqa. URL:
http://www.commoner.org.uk/blog/?p=241 (22 Nov 2011).

Heylighen, Francis (2007): Why is Open Access Development so Successful?
Stigmergic Organization and the Economics of Information. In: Bernd
Lutterbeck, Matthias Bärwolff, Robert A. Gehring (eds.), Open Source
Jahrbuch 2007. Lehmanns Media, Berlin. URL:
http://www.opensourcejahrbuch.de/portal/articles/pdfs/osjb2007-02-04-en-heylighen.pdf
(22 Nov 2011).

Lakhani, Karim R.; Robert G. Wolf (2005): Why Hackers Do What They Do.
In: Joseph Feller, Brian Fitzgerald, Scott A. Hissam, Karim R. Lakhani
(eds.), Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA. URL:\
 http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/chapters/0262062461chap1.pdf (30 Nov
2011).

Lehmann, Frauke (2004): FLOSS Developers as a Social Formation. First
Monday, 9(11). URL:
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1186/1106
(22 Nov 2011).

Marx, Karl (1894): Capital, Volume III. MEW 25. International
Publishers, New York 1967. URL:
http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1894-c3/ch46.htm (22 Nov
2011).

Moody, Glyn (2010): Ethics of Intellectual Monopolies. FSCONS 2010
Keynote.\
 MIT (2011): Fab Lab List. URL: http://fab.cba.mit.edu/about/labs/ (17
Nov 2011).

P2P Foundation (2011): Open Hardware Directory. URL:
http://p2pfoundation.net/Product\_Hacking (29 Nov 2011).

Rowe, David (2010): Baboons, Mesh Networks, and Community. URL:
http://www.rowetel.com/blog/?p=124 (22 Nov 2011).

Wikimedia Foundation (2011): Homepage. URL:
http://wikimediafoundation.org/wiki/Home (22 Nov 2011).

Wikipedia (2011): List of countries by ecological footprint. URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List\_of\_countries\_by\_ecological\_footprint
(22 Nov 2011).
